---
layout: default
title: Crafting, Items, & Inventory
nav_order: 5
description: Listonomicon
---

- Listonomicon incorporates mods that change, rebalance, or improve many vanilla magic items. Many “this-or-that” decisions locked off due to quest reward decisions will be available for sale via the Zhentarim in Act 1, and many magic items that would otherwise be impossible to purchase have been added to Act 1 and Act 2 evil traders, and many evil-only items have been added to good/neutral traders. How you resolve the Grove quest (and possible resulting quest chain) in Act 1 should no longer block access to build-critical items. In addition, some late Act 3 items have been moved for sale earlier in Act 1 and 2.	
- Furthermore, Soul Smithing allows soul coins to be spent on upgrading magic items to a higher tier. While this applies to all weapons, the Titanstring Bow and Phalar Aluve have their own deeper upgrade mechanics. The Titanstring Bow can be improved through crafting, while true spellsongs of Eilistraee are encouraged to search for a music box hidden in Act 1 and Act 2 that will upgrade the Phalar Aluve when used (you can look up the exact music box locations, but Listonomicon wants the Aluve upgrade to be an experience like collecting the ice staff parts or assembling the Necromancy of Thay). Finally, the list is “Sussurfied” - you are no longer limited to an axe, sword, or dagger in crafting your Sussur Bark weapon. You can also improve Sussur weapons. This means all magic items can be carried into later parts of the game, but our three favorites - Sussur, Phaluve, Titanbow - remain competitive and interesting choices all the way to the end of Act 3. All vanilla magic weapons can be upgraded with Soul Smithing, but the deeper Titanstring, Aluve, and Sussur mechanics require more complicated recipes or easter egg hunting.
- Finally, the list is also full of new magic items. Some items exist as static loot, intentionally placed somewhere in the world; added to a specific chest or quest reward; or will be found on the bodies of bosses. The Absolute’s fashion is no longer exclusive to Nere and other True Souls! You are encouraged to long rest more frequently, especially after increasing in level, so that shopkeeper inventories will refresh and fill with new content / their inventory will update to include items appropriate for your level (a good reason to use the 1000+ food units you collect by the end of Act 1). In general, you should feel encouraged to change your equipment more frequently than the base game, with fewer best in slot choices and with fewer magic items that feel like nothing but Gale food. You should also be able to fill the Cloak slot without having to wait until Act 3 to find anything more interesting than a Cloak of Protection.

